Thread integration page: update and add more content (#30913)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_integrations/thread.markdown

ha_zeroconf: true
---

The Thread integration helps you track the different Thread networks in your home and store the Thread network credentials (similar to a Wi-Fi password). The Thread integration in Home Assistant is currently still a work in progress.

You do not need to install this integration. The Thread integration shows up automatically when Home Assistant detects a [border router](#thread-border-router-devices).

## Logos on Thread-based smart home devices

If you have a Thread-based consumer device, you will typically see a Thread logo on the packaging.

<p class='img'><img width="200" src='/images/integrations/thread/thread-requires-border-router.png'></p>

ToDo: find up-to-date logo with correct color.

> The "Built on Thread: requires border router" logo means Thread is your only supported network protocol for this device. You cannot use Wi-Fi to onboard this device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "Built on Thread: requires border router" logo means Thread is the only supported network protocol for this device. You cannot use Wi-Fi to communicate with this device.
```

In addition, you will see a Matter or Apple HomeKit logo on the packaging.

<p class='img'><img src="/images/integrations/thread/matter_onpackbadge_logo.png"  width="200"><img src="/images/integrations/thread/apple-works-with-homekit-logo.png"  width="200"> Matter or Apple HomeKit logo on the packaging.
 </p>

> 

Reviewer: With your latest iteration, we show the logo further down, I feel these are almost distracting here. I'd drop those
```suggestion
```

## Adding a Thread-based device to Home Assistant

How a Thread-based device is added to Home Assistant depends on the home automation standard it uses.

1. If you see the Matter logo on your device, follow the procedure [adding a Matter device to Home Assistant](/integrations/matter/#adding-a-matter-device-to-home-assistant).

   <img src="/images/integrations/thread/matter_onpackbadge_logo.png"  width="200">

2. If you see the Apple HomeKit logo on your device, follow the procedure [adding a HomeKit device to Home Assistant](/integrations/homekit_controller/#adding-a-homekit-device-through-thread).

   <img src="/images/integrations/thread/apple-works-with-homekit-logo.png"  width="200">

## About Thread

This section introduces the terms *Thread* and *border router* and lists border routers that are supported by Home Assistant.

### A communication protocol for IoT devices

Thread is a low-power mesh networking standard for IoT devices. The low-power aspect is important for battery-powered smart home devices. However, it's also low-bandwidth, making it ideal for applications that don't send a lot of data, like switches or motion sensors.

> Thread uses the same <abbr title="radio frequency">RF</abbr> technology as Zigbee (IEEE 802.15.4) but provides IP connectivity similar to Wi-Fi. Unlike Zigbee, Thread does not allow controlling devices: It is just a communication protocol. To control the Thread devices, a higher-level protocol is required: Matter or Apple HomeKit.
> 
> Thread devices use the IPv6 standard to communicate both inside and outside the mesh network.

Reviewer: I don't think this needs a separate paragraph. Also small wording improvement ("Thread by itself does not allow")

```suggestion
Thread uses the same <abbr title="radio frequency">RF</abbr> technology as Zigbee (IEEE 802.15.4) but provides IP connectivity similar to Wi-Fi. Unlike Zigbee, Thread by itself does not allow controlling devices: It is just a communication protocol. To control the Thread devices, a higher-level protocol is required: Matter or Apple HomeKit. Thread devices use the IPv6 standard to communicate both inside and outside the mesh network.
```

### About Thread border routers

The devices use Thread border routers to communicate outside the mesh with any IPv6-capable device. A Thread border router is connected to your network either via Wi-Fi or Ethernet and uses its <abbr title="radio frequency">RF</abbr> radio to communicate with the Thread mesh network. The <abbr title="Thread border router">TBR</abbr> routes packets between your local network and the Thread mesh. It does not look at the content of these packets, it just forwards them.

Often, Thread border routing is only an auxiliary functionality of a smart home device. For example, the Nest Hub (2nd gen) is a smart display, a Google Home controller, and a Chromecast target, but also has a Thread border router included.

Unlike other protocols, Thread can use multiple border routers in a single network. This increases wireless coverage and reduces the risk of a single point of failure. Ideal for home automation, with a potentially large number of devices spread over a large area.

> Home Assistant can only control OpenThread <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr>. OpenThread is an open source implementation of Thread, originally released by Google.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenThread is an open source implementation of Thread, originally released by Google. Almost all commercially available Thread border routers are based on the open source implementation. However, the configuration of <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> is not part of the Thread standard. This means that Google and Apple <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> implementation setup and configured by their respective ecosystems. 

Home Assistant can only control OpenThread border routers built with the REST API available in the open source implementation. The OpenThread Border Router add-on (as well as the OpenThread Border Router bundled in the Silicon Labs Multiprotocol add-on) are built from this open source OpenThread code and have the REST API enabled.
```

### List of Thread border router devices

Currently, the following <abbr title="Thread border router">TBR</abbr> devices are known to work well with Home Assistant:

#### Nabu Casa

- [Home Assistant Yellow](/yellow/) hub

> - [Home Assistant SkyConnect](/skyconnect/) Zigbee/Thread USB stick

Reviewer: Hm, maybe we should add a note that this is Zigbee by default along with a link how-to make it Thread? :thinking:

#### Google

- **Displays**: Nest Hub (2nd gen), Nest Hub Max
- **Wi-Fi routers**: Nest Wifi Pro (Wi-Fi 6E), Nest Wifi

#### Apple

- **Speakers**: HomePod (2nd generation), HomePod mini
- **TVs**: Apple TV 4K (3rd generation) Wi-Fi + Ethernet, Apple TV 4K (2nd generation)

#### Others

> There are other companies that provide devices with border router capability, such as Nanoleaf or Amazon. They won't be mentioned further because in our development and testing we focused on the above products.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are other companies that provide devices with border router capability, such as Nanoleaf or Amazon.
```

## Understanding the Thread configuration page

This section explains why you might see multiple networks on the Thread configuration page and what this means for your network.

### About different Thread networks

Today, each vendor forms their own Thread network when you start using their products. This means you can end up having a Home Assistant, an Apple, and a Google Thread network in your home. The Thread configuration panel lists all Thread border routers and groups them by the Thread network.

<p class='img'><img width="400" src='/images/integrations/thread/thread-no-3rd-party-credentials.png'>
The Thread configuration page shows three vendor-specific Thread networks.
</p>

> These are all separate networks using different credentials, which prevents devices from roaming between the Thread networks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are all separate networks using different credentials. This means devices can't roam between the Thread networks.
```

The <img width="30px" src='/images/integrations/thread/information-outline.png'> icon indicates that Home Assistant has the credentials for that network. In this case, only the credentials of the `home assistant` network are known.

> Technical detail: Home Assistant discovers all Thread border routers in your network by their mDNS/DNS-SD announcements. The local announcements allow us to learn which networks exist, but do not contain the network credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Home Assistant discovers all Thread border routers in your network by their mDNS/DNS-SD announcements. The local announcements allow us to learn which networks exist, but do not contain the network credentials.
```

Author: ~~I like this disclaimer. It tells me it's for nerds. I can skip this. I feel like this information is almost a bit useless to a non-technical reader.~~
Ok, let me try and rephrase.

Reviewer: Nice, LGTM.

#### About the preferred network

The intention of the **Preferred network** in Home Assistant is that it will be used as the default network when adding Thread⁻based devices.

<div class="note">

The **preferred network** function isn't completely implemented yet. In particular, when adding Matter devices through the companion apps, the preferred network of the mobile device is being used.

</div>

> A Thread device can be connected to any of those Thread networks, not just the preferred one.
> 

Reviewer: I think the idea here was to say that Home Assistant can talk to Thread devices in any of those networks. But it feels a bit misplaced here, and confusing.

```suggestion
```

#### Making a network your preferred network

You can only set a Thread network as preferred if the credentials are known.

1. To import Thread credentials, The Android and iOS companion apps are used.
2. On your companion app, navigate to the Thread configuration page.
   - You should see an **Import credentials** button on the lower right corner.

   <img width="400" src='/images/integrations/thread/thread-import-credentials.png'>

   - Importing the credentials allows a Google- or Apple-created Thread network to be the preferred network of Home Assistant.
   <img width="400" src='/images/integrations/thread/thread-preferred-network.png'>

### Combining Thread networks

In the current implementation, having <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> results in separate networks using different credentials. This prevents devices from roaming between the Thread networks. In theory, it would be better to join all Thread networks into a single network to increase the size of the mesh network. A dense mesh network should lead to better <abbr title="radio frequency">RF</abbr> coverage and better link quality, which lowers transmission latencies, making communication faster.

> <div class="note">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div class="warning">
```

> However, in the current implementation, combining Thread networks seems to lead to instabilities. Therefore, we do not recommend combining networks in production just yet. This is especially true for our OpenThread Border Router in combination with Google or Apple Thread networks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, combining Thread networks seems to lead to instabilities. Therefore, we do not recommend combining networks in production just yet. This is especially true for our OpenThread Border Router in combination with Google or Apple Thread networks.
```

OpenThread is an open source implementation of Thread, originally released by Google. Almost all commercially available Thread border routers are based on the open source implementation. However, the configuration of <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> is not part of the Thread standard. This means that Google and Apple <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> implementation setup and configured by their respective ecosystems. 

Home Assistant can only control OpenThread border routers built with the REST API available in the open source implementation. The OpenThread Border Router add-on (as well as the OpenThread Border Router bundled in the Silicon Labs Multiprotocol add-on) are built from this open source OpenThread code and have the REST API enabled.

### List of Thread border router devices

Currently, the following <abbr title="Thread border router">TBR</abbr> devices are known to work well with Home Assistant:

#### Nabu Casa

- [Home Assistant Yellow](/yellow/) hub

> - [Home Assistant SkyConnect](/skyconnect/) USB stick. Out of the box, it runs Zigbee, but you can make it [run Thread](https://skyconnect.home-assistant.io/procedures/enable-thread/) instead.

Reviewer 2: we need to move this into another place. These are not known to work well but are still in development.

Reviewer 2: Simple solution would be to move them under Apple and Google and add a notice that using these is still in development and not all paths work as worry-free as using one of the commercially available border routers. We really need to set the right expectations.

Reviewer: From a Thread perspective, these are working perfectly fine. I (and countless others) have them running just fine.

The problem is the integration with Matter, specifically with the iOS eco-system. And I agree we should add a warning/note here.

I'd also leave them at the top, just like our hubs in the getting started section.

Reviewer 2: I don't agree because of the first sentence "these are known to work **well** with Home assistant". The only ones known to work well (as in: stable and all paths covered) are existing border routers from both apple and google.

Using a SkyConnect as OTBR may work well for you and some others but that does not make it a recommended solution. It is all about setting expectation and giving especially newcomers the good advise. People that want to run their own thread networks using their own custom flashed OTBR's are probably the ones that dont need these docs.

Reviewer: > "these are known to work well with Home assistant"

What do you mean? It works really stable here, since months already.

>  (as in: stable and all paths covered) are existing border routers from both apple and google.

Well, my first BR I got a bit more than a year ago was an Apple 4K which I got from my TV provider. I am in Android land. I tried to make it work but there is just no way to add any device if you don't own an iOS phone. :see_no_evil:  Not sure how it is the other way around (can you setup a Google TBR with iOS? :thinking: )

In the end, especially for Matter, all of those listed TBR need a particular combination of things to be able to work. I would really prefer to document and make recommendation in the protocol specific part, because it is protocol dependent what works best.

Reviewer 2: Fair enough:

**Home Assistant Border Router**
The Thread radio in the Home Assistant SkyConnect/Yellow together with the Open Thread Border Router add-on can be used as a Border Router but do note that it is currently limited to users on the Android ecosystem and one single BR. Support for multiple BR's will be added soon.

**Apple Border Routers:**
Recommended only for people that are already on the Apple ecosystem, having at least a recent iPhone but maybe also other Apple gear. The Home Pod v2, HomePod Mini and Apple TV 4K can be used as Thread Border router.

**Google Border Routers:**
Recommended only for people that are on the Android ecosystem, having at least a recent Android phone and an existing Nest Hub (v2) OR Google Nest WiFi pro. If no existing Google border router present (and also no desire to add one later), you may want to use Home Assistant OTBR (see above).

Something along those lines makes it a fair comparison

Author: The intention of this section is to provide a simple list of devices that can act as a border router.
It is not a buying recommendation or instruction on how to set up a border router or Thread network.

Because the prereqs (which Companion app or phone you need, etc) depend on the protocol, I suggest to add a link to these sections, rather than overloading the list with all this information.
![image](https://github.com/home-assistant/home-assistant.io/assets/38767475/86f9edde-8f48-4446-bf4c-4284fd24665e)

Reviewer 2: Let's keep the list on the thread docs flat and easy and move the matter related recommendations to the matter docs (and we can now also remove some duplication there that is now covered very well in this thread docs)

<div class="note">

The **preferred network** function isn't completely implemented yet. In particular, when adding Matter devices through the companion apps, the preferred network of the mobile device is being used.

</div>

#### Making a network your preferred network

You can only set a Thread network as preferred if the credentials are known.

1. To import Thread credentials, you need your Android and iOS companion app.
2. On your companion app, navigate to the Thread configuration page.
   - You should see an **Import credentials** button on the lower right corner.

   <img width="400" src='/images/integrations/thread/thread-import-credentials.png'>

   - Importing the credentials allows a Google- or Apple-created Thread network to be the preferred network of Home Assistant.
   <img width="400" src='/images/integrations/thread/thread-preferred-network.png'>

#### Using Home Assistant as a <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> without setting up another vendor's TBR first

This scenario currently only works in one particular case, under the following conditions:

> - You do not have a Google <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> set up yet (otherwise the Google <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> will be the preferred BR, and Android APIs do not allow to change that currently)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- You do not have any Google <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> set up yet (otherwise the Google <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> will be the preferred Thread network, and Android APIs do not allow to change that currently)
```

> - You have the OpenThread Border Router add-on installed (or the Silicon Labs Multiprotocol add-on, which includes an OpenThread Border Router). For instructions on how to enable Thread on SkyConnect or Yellow, refer to the following guides:

Reviewer 2: please remove the referral to multiprotocol here

Reviewer: Iit does not refer to multiprotocol here, it just notes that this is one of the ways to operate OTBR. It is in brackets and it is one of the valid options. We have 7k+ users runnning this option. I'd prefer if we leave it here.

Reviewer 2: I don't agree, we should remove all referrals to multi-pan. It is unstable and causing many support issues and confused users. I'm fine with people experimenting with it but lets not promote it anywhere, period.

Reviewer: This is not promoting. It isn't even a link. 

Removing it from here would hide a fact that Silicon Labs Multiprotocol includes an OpenThread Border Router. 

What if one of this 7k people is wondering where their use case is? They will land on the support, asking "how can I use the multiprotocol I have running and working well on my end?". So if anything, I'd argue hiding the fact that Multiprotocol exists will add support.

I am 100% agree, we should not promote it. But this is not promotion.

Reviewer 2: Even though it adds confusion, just scrap it here.

Reviewer: How does it add confusion?

This section is about using Home Assistant as a TBRs. It should be mentioned here.

Agreed we know of issues, so how about "(or the experimental Silicon Labs Multiprotocol add-on, which includes an OpenThread Border Router)."? :thinking:

Author: In the border router section, it is mentioned the Multiprotocol add-on includes an OTBR.
![image](https://github.com/home-assistant/home-assistant.io/assets/38767475/8168c660-646d-4a30-a149-9e0796d4f397)

Would this be sufficient to cover the use case?

Reviewer: Actually, it seems a good point to actively promote the dediciated Thread over Multiprotocol. New suggestion: https://github.com/home-assistant/home-assistant.io/pull/30913/files#r1461693490

  - [Enabling Thread on SkyConnect](https://skyconnect.home-assistant.io/procedures/enable-thread/)
  - [Enabling Thread on Yellow](https://yellow.home-assistant.io/procedures/enable-thread/)

> - You have an Android phone and the Home Assistant Companion App.

Reviewer 2: This will not work on an iOS device, maybe add an additional note/warning.

Author: Hm...
The introduction to this section states 
"_This scenario currently only works in one particular case, under the following conditions:"
- The idea here was to focus on the one way it does work, and not list all the possible ways where it does not work

Reviewer: We can add the fact that iOS devices are not working in brackets still, e.g. "(iOS Home Assistant Companion App is not working)"

Reviewer 2: agree with @agners on this one, adding it in brackets makes it super clear. Or any other option to make it a side note

> - The devices you want to add to the network support Matter. For instructions on how to add Thread-based Matter devices, refer to the section [Adding a Matter device to Home Assistant](/integrations/matter/#adding-a-matter-device-to-home-assistant)

Reviewer 2: There is a step missing:  Make sure that you've set Home Assistant as the preferred network first (step above).

Reviewer 2: Or better stated: 

> Make sure that there are no other Thread networks present (see above).

- You do not have a Google <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> set up yet (otherwise the Google <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> will be the preferred BR, and Android APIs do not allow to change that currently)
- You have the OpenThread Border Router add-on installed. For instructions on how to enable Thread on SkyConnect or Yellow, refer to the following guides:
  - [Enabling Thread on SkyConnect](https://skyconnect.home-assistant.io/procedures/enable-thread/)
  - [Enabling Thread on Yellow](https://yellow.home-assistant.io/procedures/enable-thread/)
- You have an Android phone and the Home Assistant Companion App.
- The devices you want to add to the network support Matter. For instructions on how to add Thread-based Matter devices, refer to the section [Adding a Matter device to Home Assistant](/integrations/matter/#adding-a-matter-device-to-home-assistant)

Which TBR are supported mostly depends on (access to) the Thread credentials. And Thread credentials are required during on-boarding/commissioning, which is part of the smart home protocol.

### Combining Thread networks

> In the current implementation, having <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> results in separate networks using different credentials. This prevents devices from roaming between the Thread networks. In theory, it would be better to join all Thread networks into a single network to increase the size of the mesh network. A dense mesh network should lead to better <abbr title="radio frequency">RF</abbr> coverage and better link quality, which lowers transmission latencies, making communication faster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the current implementation, having multiple <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> from different vendors results in separate networks using different credentials. This prevents devices from roaming between the Thread networks. In theory, it would be better to join all Thread networks into a single network to increase the size of the mesh network. A dense mesh network should lead to better <abbr title="radio frequency">RF</abbr> coverage and better link quality, which lowers transmission latencies, making communication faster.
```

Often, Thread border routing is only an auxiliary functionality of a smart home device. For example, the Nest Hub (2nd gen) is a smart display, a Google Home controller, and a Chromecast target, but also has a Thread border router included.

Unlike other protocols, Thread can use multiple border routers in a single network. This increases wireless coverage and reduces the risk of a single point of failure. Ideal for home automation, with a potentially large number of devices spread over a large area.

OpenThread is an open source implementation of Thread, originally released by Google. Almost all commercially available Thread border routers are based on the open source implementation. However, the configuration of <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> is not part of the Thread standard. This means that Google and Apple <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> implementation setup and configured by their respective ecosystems.

> Home Assistant can only control OpenThread border routers built with the REST API available in the open source implementation. The OpenThread Border Router add-on (as well as the OpenThread Border Router bundled in the Silicon Labs Multiprotocol add-on) are built from this open source OpenThread code and have the REST API enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Home Assistant can only control OpenThread border routers built with the REST API available in the open source implementation. The OpenThread Border Router add-on (as well as the OpenThread Border Router bundled in the experimental Silicon Labs Multiprotocol add-on) are built from this open source OpenThread code and have the REST API enabled.
```

You can only set a Thread network as preferred if the credentials are known.

1. To import Thread credentials, you need your Android and iOS companion app.
2. On your companion app, navigate to the Thread configuration page.
   - You should see an **Import credentials** button on the lower right corner.

   <img width="400" src='/images/integrations/thread/thread-import-credentials.png'>

   - Importing the credentials allows a Google- or Apple-created Thread network to be the preferred network of Home Assistant.
   <img width="400" src='/images/integrations/thread/thread-preferred-network.png'>

#### Using Home Assistant as a <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> without setting up another vendor's TBR first

This scenario currently only works in one particular case, under the following conditions:

- Make sure there are no other Thread networks set up:
  - For example: Make sure you do not have any Google <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> set up yet (otherwise the Google <abbr title="Thread border routers">TBRs</abbr> will be the preferred Thread network, and Android APIs do not allow to change that currently).

> - You have the OpenThread Border Router add-on installed. For instructions on how to enable Thread on SkyConnect or Yellow, refer to the following guides:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You have the OpenThread Border Router add-on installed. If you have the experimental Silicon Labs Multiprotocol add-on installed, we recommend migrating to the pure Thread firmware, as especially Thread traffic appears to cause stability issues. For instructions on how to enable/migrate to a dedicated Thread setup on SkyConnect or Yellow, refer to the following guides:
```
